I am glad to meet you. My name is Smirnova Nadezhda. I am a teacher at the Moscow Business School and teach at the Russian Economic Academy in Plekhanov.
Today we will talk about the development and formalization of a strategy. We will discuss how strategic diagnostics is involved in the process of strategy development, how the process of strategy development is carried out, why it is necessary to stop at the end and audit it again.
Let's look at an example that was developed as part of one of the consulting projects, which I was a participant in.
The first topic. We have already talked about the process of strategy development. It consists of a number of stages. First, it is necessary to find out what the idea of the company owners is, what the company should look like in a certain period of time.
Then, certain diagnostic measures are required to determine the state of the company. This includes the interests of stakeholders, the internal state of the company, the external environment of the company.
As a result, we form a vision of the target state for which the company should come. And finally, we move on to the development of a strategy, that is, to determine the path along which we will go from point A to point B.
Point A is the current state of the company, point B is what the company should become in a given period of time. Let's start with the first one. We must carry out strategic diagnostics.
You have already seen a number of methods that are used. There are a lot of them. We analyze the external environment using industry analysis. This can be the portfolio epiocycle, the life cycle of the industry, the potential of the industry, the key factors of success.
This is the IPS analysis, when we analyze the political, economic, social, technological factors of the environment. This is the analysis of competition, the emergence of strategic groups, the determination of the strategy of competitors. This is the analysis of consumers, the determination of the characteristics of who they are, what motives of their purchases exist, what their dissatisfaction is.
These are stakeholders, shareholders, managers, staff, authorities, all those who are interested in our company. The internal environment is analyzed through the analysis of business systems. We analyze the types of activities to create value for the consumer. These are technological changes that can occur in our company.
The analysis of the portfolio of businesses, financial analysis, profitability, profitability, analysis of financial coefficients. This can be the 7S of McKinsey, where the strategy, system and style are analyzed, skills and skills of the staff, management structure, the shared values in the company. This is the marketing audit, when we conduct the analysis of the marketing service, the marketing concept.
But in fact, if in your company the strategy is not yet formalized, you need to take only the most important, the most convenient methods in order not to be in a situation when we do a big analysis, and in fact, we do not go to the process of strategy development.
Therefore, a small number of diagnostic methods are usually used to develop some strategic recommendations, on the basis of which a strategic plan of the company will be built.
As a rule, SWOT analysis is used to get an answer of what the company is and in what conditions it works. The analysis of the 5 forces of the portfolio is used to understand how the company relates to its competitors. The analysis of the value for the buyer is used to determine how the company is evaluated by its own buyers.
And the analysis of the process is carried out in order to answer the question of whether the business processes of the company are optimized. As a result, we understand in general terms, with large strokes, the state in which the company is today.
Let me be more serious about the management survey that is carried out within the company. That is, on a consistent assessment of the functional zones of the organization in order to identify its strategically strong and weak sides. In principle, also the possibility of a threat.
Here the marketing function is analyzed. As a rule, the analysis of the market share, competitiveness of the product, variety and quality of the product is analyzed. Market statistics are analyzed. This is a complex analysis when we try to track the changes in the needs of buyers.
Market research and development is analyzed. That is, the analysis of new products that are appearing among competitors is carried out, as well as the analysis of those products that are necessary to maintain the competitiveness of our company.
The level of pre-sale and post-sale service of customers is analyzed. This is especially relevant for Russian companies, because pre-sale and post-sale service, as a rule, is not very good.
The efficiency of sales is analyzed. Advertising is analyzed. The method of promotion of the product is analyzed. And, of course, the profit. Since all our actions, even if they are very good, do not bring profit, are probably not very interesting for the company.
The next functional zone is the function of finance and accounting. Here, as a rule, the method of analysis of financial coefficients is used, with the help of which we can assess growth, profitability, capital formation, management using borrowed funds, the state of stocks, carry out an analysis of the creditor-debitor debt, and so on.
It is necessary for us to determine the level of availability of resources for the implementation of strategically significant projects that we will introduce into the strategy and lay down a strategic plan, as well as to determine the effectiveness of using assets in the company.
In addition, we can use the method of the brought money flow. Then we will be able to analyze the prospects of the company's capital investment. The analysis of the financial situation is carried out. For this purpose, the report on profits and losses, accounting balance, and the movement of money are used.
All these methods are already familiar to you from the module on finance. The next functional zone, which must be devoted to a certain time in the analysis and management examination, is production.
It is necessary to assess production, analyze operations and organizations in the sphere of its main activity. It is necessary to analyze the chain of creation of value, which we have already discussed today. The chain of creation of value shows the contribution of each type of activity in the solution of the main tasks of the company.
The direction in which the consumer value of the product can be increased, and moreover, the direction in which the consumer value can be increased without additional costs.
The analysis of production capacities is carried out here. How convenient the capacities are located, how adequate the production capacities and production capabilities of the company are, and the level of production.
The analysis of the efficiency of production is carried out, the costs are analyzed, the controlling over the costs is analyzed, the technological processes used are analyzed. The result is the development of the profile of effective production, a certain benchmark.
The working force is analyzed, its quality, flexibility. The quality is analyzed, that is, the efficiency of the quality control system is analyzed. The supply sources are analyzed, that is, it is revealed how strong the influence of suppliers is.
The research and development is analyzed, the level of investment in innovative research is determined in order to understand how possible the creation and withdrawal of a new product or new technology to the market.
The next important area that needs to be analyzed is the personnel area, the structure of the company, its corporate culture. When we talk about the functional personnel area, we understand that we need to study the overall level of personnel, preferably by groups.
We need to determine the level of competence and training of top management. We need to analyze the reward system and the effectiveness of its use. In principle, to answer the question, what actions does the reward system stimulate the personnel of the company?
We need to analyze the assessment system of the personnel activity, the development system of the personnel, including the improvement of qualifications and promotion of specialists and managers. We need to analyze cross-functional communications, and, of course, traditional communication from top to bottom and feedback from bottom to top.
We need to analyze the reason for the dismissal of leading specialists. When we talk about the organizational structure, we mean the need to analyze the level of organization's bureaucratization and the analysis of ways of interaction between departments, employees, subordinates, managers.
And finally, the corporate culture. Here we study the psychological climate, the style of relations and behavior of employees in the organization, their expectations and how the psychological contract is fulfilled in the company, the image of the company, including the positive image of the employer.
The external impression that is formed in the environment, depending on how the company behaves in the market in relation to different agents and what are the results of the company's activities.
Everything obtained as a result of strategic diagnostics, as a result of the analysis, we include in the matrix of the assembly. The slide shows the structure of the matrix of the assembly. Weak, strong sides, opportunities and threats.
To understand the separation between these four quadrants, which are included in the matrix of the assembly, I will tell you a story. Imagine you are leaving home. It's raining outside. You took an umbrella with you and you are not afraid of the rain. In this case, you used threats and your strong sides.
A threat is a rain that is falling on the street. It can happen or not. Moreover, the presence of this threat, its implementation does not depend on you leaving the house.
However, you have a strong side. You took an umbrella with you. This umbrella gives you the opportunity to avoid the negative consequences of getting wet.
The same applies to the company. Strong and weak sides are what the company is able to influence. This is where the results of the analysis of the functional zones are brought in. Marketing, finance, operational activity, personnel, management, company resources.
Opportunities and threats are the external environment, which the company cannot influence. Suppliers, consumers, government, competitors, capital market, technology, the environment.
This is all that the company does not influence. But the company is forced to adapt to the actions of these elements of the market.
We will discuss the draft for a car dealer. The largest company in the south of Russia.
The company is a multi-brand company. It has 20 brands. The weak sides of the car dealer are the unstructured management system and a shortage of qualified personnel.
The company has a large number of car dealers in neighboring regions. And finally, the availability of resources and connections. First of all, the company talked about the administrative resource.
The company has a large number of car dealers in neighboring regions. And finally, the availability of resources and connections.
We answer the question, how the threat that the company does not influence is strengthened with the presence of the weak sides of the company.
We can determine ways to reduce risks. We can reduce the existing risks, reduce the threat. Thus, we compare the strengths and threats.
We can determine ways to increase the competitiveness of the company. We can determine how to develop certain weak sides of the company.
As a result, we get some sketches of strategic alternatives. Now you can complete the tasks on the first topic.
The next topic is the development of a strategy and its formalization.
We have discussed the fact that we get a set of strategic alternatives. We can form them according to the groups based on the cross-analysis.
The first group is the strategy of using the opportunities. How to use the opportunities of the external environment. The second group is the strategy of eliminating threats. How to prevent threats to the external environment of the company.
The third group is the strategy of maintaining, strengthening and using the strong sides. How to maintain and use the strong sides of the company.
The fourth group is the strategy of eliminating the weak sides of the company. How to eliminate the weak sides of the company.
We have formed four groups of strategic alternatives. The strategy of using the opportunities, the strategy of eliminating threats, the strategy of maintaining, strengthening and using the strong sides, the strategy of eliminating the weak sides.
We have formed these alternatives according to the strategic diagnosis and according to the strategic goals of the company.
Now we need to make a qualitative analysis of the portfolio of alternatives. We need to determine the fullness of the portfolio of strategic alternatives.
We need to analyze all the strategies that we have arranged in four groups independently of each other, otherwise the principle of alternativeness is violated.
And finally, we check again for the compliance with the goals of each strategic alternative. As soon as we have conducted a qualitative analysis, we receive an answer.
Does the portfolio of alternative strategies meet all requirements? If it does, we have a portfolio of strategic alternatives ready. It is ready for us to choose the optimal strategy, which we will translate into the future strategic plan, a set of events and start implementing.
If not, then we must again turn to the stage of forming a group of strategic alternatives.
In order to choose the most optimal strategic alternative, the Abel matrix is often used. The Abel matrix is a matrix that shows how much the company needs some decisive changes and how actively the company is in the market.
As a result, we get some requirements for the strategy. If the company needs decisive changes and the company is actively a leader in the market, then strategic alternatives are suitable for us, which sharply change the strategy, which generate new trends.
If the company needs decisive changes and the company is actively a leader in the market, then strategic alternatives are suitable for us, which sharply change the strategy, which generate new trends.
There may be a situation when the company is a supporter of slow evolutionary change. There are two options. The company can be an adapter, a follower or a leader. If the company is a leader, then it tries to predict any changes in the environment, any trends.
If the company is a follower, then it tries to predict any changes in the environment, any trends.
If we talk about which strategic alternatives are chosen most often or most rarely, then we can classify them as follows.
The strategy of limited growth is the most frequently used strategy by companies. We set goals from the achieved level, taking into account a small increase. This small increase is necessary for us to maintain the position of the company in its markets.
We can use the strategy of active growth or by using the external environment of the company. In this case, we will talk about vertical integration and building a vertically integrated company.
In fact, for many companies, the strategy of reduction can mean a healthy path of rationalization and reorientation of activities.
There are three possible strategies. The strategy of liquidation means a complete sale of assets and reserves and a planned withdrawal of capital from some non-promising business direction.
The strategy of liquidation means a complete sale of assets and reserves and a planned withdrawal of capital from some non-promising business direction.
The strategy of cutting off excess means a liquidation of some non-promising business direction.
The strategy of prioritization means a liquidation of some activities in the low market conditions.
Companies use this strategy if they think that after a certain period of time there will be a rise in this direction and it is necessary to maintain production capacity to resume activities when the situation in the market changes for the better.
The example of the strategy of reduction can be, for example, the withdrawal of services from large holding companies and the creation of IT, repairs.
The strategy of liquidation means a complete sale of assets and reserves and a planned withdrawal of capital from some non-promising business direction.
We are now following the traditional way. The vision that was formed by the owners is a static picture.
We have a significant acceleration of all processes that flow into the company and into the market.
We want to have a vision of the company through a certain period of time in dynamics. To implement this approach, scenario modeling is used.
The first step is to see the solution. This means to identify the key factors of the company's success that will be necessary to develop and promote and which will be associated with the main goals of the company.
Then comes the stage of information hunting. This means identifying the factors of influence.
The first step is to identify the factors of influence. This means identifying the factors of influence.
From this point of view, we need to analyze the macro environment, demographic, economic, social, political, environmental changes.
Then we need to find the predetermined. This means that we need to identify the events, the forces that are predetermined and that will most likely occur.
After this, we identify the critical uncertainties. We move to the opposite stage. We identify the factors that are very uncertain.
As a result, we get the opportunity to write a script. As a rule, 3-4 scripts are formed. They are uniform in terms of what we cannot say. This script is bad, this script is good, this script is optimal.
No, the approach is based on the fact that we put different factors of uncertainty in the script, applying them to the canvas of the predetermined events.
The script is now the closest to the real situation. Naturally, each script is accompanied by a developed strategic plan, events.
Each script is budgeted, and thus we get several ways that are formed depending on the situation in the external environment to achieve our desired state.
Then we need to talk about the scope of this script approach and what requirements we must meet to develop the script.
First, the script must be developed in the context of the main task that is before the company, in the context of strategic goals. In addition, it is necessary to remember that the scripts must be simple enough to understand.
Moreover, they must be memorable, they must be simple to discuss, at least for all participants of the working group of developers. In fact, for those for whom these scripts will be broadcast, who will have to implement them.
The script must be developed interactively in order to maximize all possible misconceptions, all possible views of the participants of the working group working on the script, and, accordingly, to increase their capabilities and creative potential.
To develop scripts, we need to allocate a lot of time. As a rule, in companies, up to two months are allocated for the development of scripts. Why is this done?
In order for the participants to have the opportunity to reflect, discuss their original ideas in an informal setting, so that they can attract experts, so that they can find additional necessary information.
Of course, it is not necessary to concentrate on simple alternatives. Each script must be based on its own logic. The scripts should not be selected according to the principle of the most liked or most likely.
We say in script modeling that the development scenario is a way of organizing learning. Therefore, we cannot focus on the assessment of the degree of probability of the onset of certain events.
The scripts are developed in order to see several pictures of the future. In each of these pictures of the future there will be both a negative and a positive beginning. There should not be too many scripts, and they should not be good or bad.
In one of the US state institutions, 10 possible development scenarios were developed. But it was not possible to assess their differences in terms of the range of necessary management decisions.
As a result, their number was reduced to three. As a rule, 3-4 scenarios are made, since 3-4 is the maximum limit that is determined by human memory abilities.
Each of the scenarios must have a memorable title. It can be a line from a song, a line from a popular movie. Each scenario must have its own center of responsibility.
The manager who will communicate and inform all the employees of the organization on this scenario. It is desirable that the manager who will do all this, participate in the development of the scenario.
Enough resources should be allocated to inform employees about the developed scenarios. The practice shows that the scenarios themselves are designed in a small group, and then it is necessary to involve a wider mass of employees.
This is done either in the process of training, or through various informational channels within the organization, from role-playing games to the appeal of the company's top person to its employees with a story about the developed scenarios.
One of the metallurgical companies engaged in color metallurgy conducted a scenario analysis and identified scenario restrictions. In particular, having calculated the general trends over the past few years, it was revealed that the positive dynamics of demand for the main products in the company's portfolio was positive.
Thus, one of the scenarios was the increase in prices and volumes.
The second scenario was the decrease in prices. A correlation between the different types of ferroalloys was identified, and as a result, the company was able to build another scenario that laid the foundation for a sharp fluctuation in prices on the market.
And finally, the third scenario was built on the basis that the change in prices on the market can level or, on the contrary, the effect of price changes can increase significantly.
And thus, realizing that the company's profit directly depends on the fluctuation of prices, the company found a scenario related to the delivery and storage of its products, when during the period of market collapse it was necessary to sharply reduce the costs for delivery and storage,
and thereby try to achieve the same level of profitability as it was in the high prices, when the company was not engaged in reducing costs for logistics.
Now let's see how the selection of realistic strategies is made. Let's assume that the company has chosen certain strategies.
Let's assume that the company's orientation is development, that is, the orientation to maximize profits, self-organization, that is, increasing efficiency, and creating value, the orientation to increase the value of the company.
Then, for each of the identified goals, development, self-organization, and creating value, we can develop a number of strategic alternatives.
Let's say, development. Alternatives can be increased sales volume, attracting customers through marketing strategies, the exit to new geographical markets, such as geographical expansion, and differentiation and diversification of business.
Increasing efficiency. Strategic alternatives can be product expansion, partly geographical, individual management of costs reduction and increasing the quality of the product and service, and development and implementation of policy and costs below competitors.
The goal of creating value can be realized through the following strategic alternatives. Focus on optimizing information flows and compliance with international standards. Alternatives of merging and absorption. Alternatives of vertical integration of business. Alternatives of creating strategic alliances and alternatives of creating strategic partnerships.
Now we need to prioritize strategic alternatives. For this, we can use the SOATI method, which is a matrix of feasibility and efficiency.
In the quadrant of this matrix, where we observe the greatest feasibility and efficiency, there are priorities of strategic alternatives of the first level.
If we follow the traditional way of strategy development and choose one strategic alternative, which will be the most realistic, the most optimal, and which we will further detail, the choice will be one strategic alternative.
In this case, if we approach from the position of scenario modeling, we will choose 3-4 scenarios, the most priority. This method is used both in the traditional approach to strategy development and in scenario modeling.
After we have prioritized the goals, chosen either one strategic alternative or several scenarios, we must work on either the main version of the strategy or several versions of the strategy.
This is done either by means of a tree of strategic goals or by means of building a strategic map.
In any case, we try to connect the cause-and-effect relationship, the mission of the company, its general strategic goal, which we decompose into sub-goals, and each of the sub-goals is reinforced by a set of measures.
We can highlight a number of strategic goals. Goals related to profitability, goals related to the formation and use of financial resources, goals related to the market application, goals related to productivity,
goals related to the organization of production, production capacity, innovations, research, human resources, setting goals, and goals.
We discussed them in one of the previous topics. So, we have developed the goals. These goals can be presented as one of the examples.
The company believes that the main general goal of the business it is engaged in now is to become an international terminal network of metallurgical and other products.
This goal is divided into sub-goals. The development of a branch network in the CIS and abroad, the development of an assortment line of products from $ 500 to $ 2,000 per ton, and the provision of attractiveness, transparency and manageability of the company for external investors.
The company has set a goal of building a ferroalloy empire. Then, the company will set a goal of achieving an annual turnover of $ 1 billion and the implementation of up to 100,000 tons of ferroalloy in the world.
We can build a system of goals using a strategic map. One of the methods of building a strategic map is the proposal of Norton and Kaplan, when we highlight a number of perspectives, finance, clients, internal processes, training and growth.
Within these perspectives, we decompose the main general strategic goal of the company. Here we achieve several effects. First, we get a decomposition over a period of time.
Look, what is finance? Finance is our view of what the company was yesterday. If we look at the profit in 2008, what profit do we analyze? The profit of 2007. Clients and internal processes. Perspectives that characterize what the company is today.
In fact, we answer the question, what image does the company have and what needs to be done with the company to become the most attractive in the eyes of clients?
What needs to be done inside the company to satisfy the business owners with the results? And finally, we get a perspective that characterizes our tomorrow. This is a perspective of training and growth.
The staff is our everything. This is what we will use to implement the strategy. This is what we will use to implement some innovations. Therefore, this perspective characterizes us as we will be tomorrow.
The unification of these perspectives allows us to get different aspects of the company's activities and show the connection between the decomposed goals.
To show how, with the help of each goal, aimed at solving different financial issues related to the position of the company in the market, with the development of the company's internal structure and, finally, with the development of the staff, we can achieve the main general goal that we set for ourselves.
Thus, we can talk about the basic elements of the strategic map. Of course, everything starts with vision and strategy. That is, how we are going to achieve our vision of the future.
Then we lay down the perspectives. We can say that this is a point of view, aspects. That is, we actually answer the question of how we will decompose our strategy.
This is just a tool for decomposition. It is convenient.
Next, strategic goals. That is, what we will actually achieve. Indicators. How can we measure our movement in the right direction. Each strategic goal is accompanied by a number of indicators that measure the degree of achievement of this goal.
As a rule, in order for the system to be manageable, it is recommended that 3-7 indicators are developed for each strategic goal. Each indicator has a target value that characterizes what we should achieve.
Let's look at an example of a target tree. You have a strategic map on the slide, developed for a trading and manufacturing company. It is quite simple and we will look at it in detail.
The most important goal of the company is to achieve profitability. It wants to achieve profitability due to the growth of sales. It is these two goals that the company lays down in the future with finance.
The growth of sales is achieved due to the prospects of customers, due to the way the company behaves towards customers. The growth of sales will be achieved by increasing the satisfaction of buyers, which will be achieved by increasing the quality of the product.
The goal is to achieve high-quality products, which will be achieved by increasing the quality of the product.
As a result, the company lays down indicators for the achievement of each goal. For example, profitability, operating profit, growth of sales, volume of sales, quality of products, percentage of permanent buyers and return on investment.
The goal values are set, which characterize the level of achievement of this goal. And events or initiatives are prescribed, which characterize the necessary set of actions to achieve each goal.
Let's look at another example. The example of a strategic map of a manufacturing company.
The goal is to increase profit. This will be achieved in two ways. Due to the increase in marginal income and due to the reduction of permanent costs.
Marginal income will increase by increasing the brand value, increasing the supply of the complexes that the company produces, increasing the volume of sales.
In turn, the increase in volume of sales is carried out by organizing a secondary market, increasing export, increasing loyalty of customers and developing a service network.
In order to achieve the goals set for the future of the market, the company intends to change internal processes, namely, to increase the volume of production, which will lead to the increase in the volume of sales, to increase reliability, which will certainly contribute to increasing loyalty of customers,
and to reduce the cost, which will allow to increase the marginal income.
In order to increase the volume of production, the company plans to improve the planning system, increase productivity and develop outsourcing.
The implementation of these goals in the future of internal processes is possible only if the goal of increasing loyalty of the staff and optimizing the organization of labor is achieved.
Let's look at another example, another strategic map. This is a strategic map of a commercial organization. It is probably the most complete of the ones presented to you. It can be used as a template.
The value for shareholders as the main goal of this business, this commercial organization is achieved in two ways. The first way is the strategy of productivity and the second way is the strategy of income growth.
In order to implement the strategy of productivity, it is necessary to improve the structure of costs and increase the degree of use of assets. In order to achieve the strategy of income growth, it is necessary to create value for consumers and expand the opportunities for income.
Thus, it is necessary to form a value proposition for the client, which will consist of price, quality, availability, choice, functionality, service, partnership and brand.
In other words, there will be products and services, relationships with the client and the image company.
We need to implement the process of creating new products and services. These will be innovative processes.
We need to implement processes that facilitate the improvement of local communities, relations with the authorities in order to influence the brand, partnership and relations with the client.
This is possible if we implement the goals, prospects of development and growth in the field of human capital, including skills, training, knowledge, knowledge development, in the framework of the formation of information capital, this is a system, database, a website, CRM, and in the framework of organizational capital.
This is possible if we implement the goals, prospects of development and growth in the field of organizational capital, including skills, knowledge development, in the framework of organizational capital.
This involves changing some internal processes, in particular, the implementation of CRM, the expansion of the assortment and set of services, and the provision of cross-sales.
Thus, in order to meet the goals, prospects of internal processes, it is necessary to meet the goals of increasing the satisfaction of the staff.
This is possible by implementing the goals of development of financial planning skills, improving the knowledge of key bank clients, and goals of building a system of reward for results.
In this way, as you can see, we have considered several strategic cards. They are similar in many ways, but in many ways different. You can build the same strategic card for your company.
What if it is a holding? The holding can have several roles. But in any case, the sphere of interests of the holding management company is investment.
We can divide the roles that the holding management company is ready to take on the following. It can be a financial holding, it can be a strategic architect, it can be a strategic controller or an operator.
It depends on how much the holding management company will interfere in the process of operational management.
Financial holding. The holding management company makes key decisions about investments and withdrawal of funds, in fact, setting budget limits and target indicators.
In principle, the financial holding management company does not interfere in the business of business units.
Strategic architect. The level of influence is already greater. The strategic architect develops the strategic vision of the future corporation as a whole, determines the direction of action, a certain strategic vector for business units and a single methodology for managing the strategy.
Further, the development of a strategy is the business of each business unit. The developed business strategy is analyzed by the managing company and resources are distributed between business units.
That is, the strategic architect offers, approves investments and withdrawal of funds. In principle, its task is to check the business logic of the approved strategic investments.
Perhaps another role of the managing company is the role of the strategic controller. Then the managing company controls the technical and operational basis of business strategies, which are developed by business units.
The strategic controller distributes resources between them and strives to enhance the synergy effect. He checks the commercial and functional logic of key investments.
Another role of the managing company is the operator. In this case, the managing company is the head of the development and implementation of the strategy in all business units.
The operating manager of the business unit is the head of the development and implementation of the strategy. The operating manager of the business unit is the head of the development and implementation of the strategy.
Financial holding. The managing company does not try to coordinate the activities of business units or achieve synergetic effects. An example of this is the IFK system for Russia.
The strategic architect. There may be companies with business-related directions, but there is no such thing. However, these companies pay a lot of attention to the unified management methodology, including strategies.
The Russian example of such a company is the Iconica group, which deals with shoes, construction, tools.
The role of the strategic controller. Often this is a company with several business-related directions, or in general, with a single business unit that serves all companies. For example, the sales unit of the company is single for the entire company.
The example of such a company is the Solovat Oil Worksynthesis, which represents several business-related directions. This is the chemical industry, oil processing plants, gas and chemical industry.
The company has a single sales service for all the plants. The operator. Often this is a company that develops one business direction and has a number of branches in various regions. An example of such a company is the British Airways.
So, the strategy of the upper level has been developed. What's next? Next, our task is to decompose the strategy according to the hierarchy of the organizational company.
The organization structure of the company is used to carry out this process. The process of vertical and horizontal decomposition is highlighted.
At the vertical level, we transfer some of the goals and indicators from the company level to the level of individual business units or departments.
Further, at the level of individual business units, the same transfer is carried out at the level of each employee.
Why is this necessary? This is necessary so that when the strategy is implemented, our units do not start acting according to the principle of swan, cock and pike.
Let's look at the problem of vertical decomposition.
Vertical decomposition is necessary in order to transfer the goals of the unit from the level of the higher management through the middle management link to the level of line managers and line employees.
And then to get feedback in the form of indicators and achievements of the target values of the indicators. This feedback will go from line employees through the middle management link to the higher management.
The methods of vertical decomposition of the strategic map can be different. As a rule, at least three methods of six existing methods are used.
The first method is the method of vertical decomposition.
The second method is the method of vertical decomposition.
In this case, we look at the strategic map of the upper level and independently formulate our own goals that will be included in the strategy of our unit.
The only thing we need is for these things to somehow combine.
The next method is the direct determination of goals based on the goals of the upper level.
We take the goals of the upper level, which are developed by the company, and transfer them to the strategic map of this unit.
Naturally, we change the goals of the upper level in case we have a specific activity.
The next method is the method of adaptation of target indicators from strategic events.
We take the goals, target indicators, strategic events that are included in the strategic map of the upper level and adapt them to what our unit is doing.
That is, we take not the whole value of the indicator, but only part of it.
Not all strategic events can be carried out at our level.
The next method is the method of combining standard individual goals.
We can take part of the goals from the strategic map of the upper level, but we will have to come up with part of it ourselves, depending on what specific activity is laid down in our functional zone, in our unit.
The next method is the method of direct determination of strategic events.
We look at the goals of the company, at the events that the company intends to carry out, and we just formulate the events that our unit can carry out.
And finally, the method of open communication, when communication is carried out within the framework of meetings, within the framework of work of working groups, regarding the development of strategic maps of the units.
Only in this case, each unit goes through the entire path of development of the strategy, all the stages that we are now going through in this topic.
Then comes the implementation.
In order to implement the developed strategy, including goals, events, indicators, target values, as component parts, we need to develop an implementation plan.
We need to distribute the responsibility zones for the achievement of the event.
We need to determine the calendar plan for the implementation of the event, i.e. the date of the beginning and the date of the end of each event.
We need to consolidate the centers of responsibility, i.e. the executors.
We need to consolidate the centers of control, i.e. who controls the execution.
As a rule, the centers of responsibility and the centers of control are assigned in accordance with the organizational structure of the company.
And finally, we need to assign the target indicators of how we will carry out this event.
We need to understand that the event is carried out based on the value of this indicator.
The implementation of the strategy is a continuous process.
It is a continuous process of transforming the strategic plan of the company into continuous actions, and then into achievements.
Therefore, the process of developing and implementing the strategy will be closed.
Starting with the diagnosis, planning, then execution, then checking the results and carrying out control and monitoring events,
then, based on the analysis plan, controlling the changes.
As I said, this process is cyclical, non-stop.
Thus, we have developed a strategy.
But before we start implementing it, we need to audit it.
To return to the first step again, to audit the strategy.
This can be done either by one's own or by inviting external consultants and experts.
To conduct an audit of the strategy, we will use the following criteria.
These criteria were proposed by Thomson and Strickland.
Priority strategies should include strategic actions.
Strategic actions aimed at strengthening the competitive position of the organization in the long term.
Accordingly, we carry out an audit of this criteria, look at the strategy that we have developed, and then, based on the results, we will make a decision.
Then, the strategy should ensure a rapid response to changes in the external environment, to changes in the market situation and to the requirements of consumers.
To the availability and development of technological innovations.
To any new initiatives of competitors.
Accordingly, we review the strategy in accordance with this criteria.
We have 10 such criteria.
We have considered two.
Further.
The third criterion is long-term investments needed to create a stable competitive advantage.
Aggressive offensive for its acquisition.
And aggressive defense in order to maintain the competitive advantage we have achieved.
The following criteria.
We need to avoid strategies designed for success only in favorable conditions.
Then.
We need to adequately assess the ambitions and capabilities of competitors.
It is necessary to remember that an attack on weak competitors is much safer, much more profitable than an attack on strong competitors.
Beat the weak.
In addition, it is impossible to reduce the price without having significant advantages in terms of costs.
Therefore, any price wars are fraught.
The following criteria.
It is necessary to achieve the maximum detachment from competitors in terms of quality of goods and services or in terms of their consumer properties.
Moreover, there is a whole industry where quality is a necessary component, without which it is simply impossible to survive in this market.
And finally, the penultimate criterion.
It is necessary to avoid intermediate strategies.
Strategies that arise when trying to follow two opposite strategies at the same time.
For example.
Profit can be achieved by reducing costs and increasing revenue.
But these are mutually exclusive goals.
Since we increase revenue, including by increasing production volumes.
Increasing production volumes and reducing costs will be mutually exclusive.
And so we will come to a certain intermediate strategy that can lead to nothing.
It is important to understand what the target function is and what its limitation is.
And finally, the last criterion.
Aggressive attempts to seize the share of the market lead to exacerbation of the situation in the industry.
Therefore, a priori, it is detrimental for all players.
There will be a so-called marketing arms race and a price war on the market.
This should be remembered and, in fact, it is not worth focusing on the strategy of your company.
We can talk about certain postulates that are characteristic of the development of a strategy.
These postulates were developed by Michael Porter and proposed.
The first postulate is not to strive to be the first. Be unique.
Setting the goal of becoming the first in the industry is probably not the right thing to do.
The fact is that it is easier to spend effort to fight with competitors in the same niche.
It is easier to find or create your own market niche within the framework of a strategy.
The next postulate. The main goal is high return on investment.
This is really the main goal of the company.
A high return on investment is the right goal.
The growth of the company is a secondary goal, which should be devoted to a large enough amount of effort,
but only after the return on investment has been achieved.
Industry. Industry is the basis of strategic analysis.
An economically efficient company consists of two components.
These are the components of the industry structure.
The general rules of competition are set and the position of the company in its industry is set.
That is, the sources of competitive advantages are set.
The strategy includes both elements.
You should not be afraid to compromise.
The most important part of the strategy is to make the right choice.
When for strategic positions we can definitely say that they are compatible with each other.
That is, in principle, we determine what the company needs to do.
The next important postulate, which Michael Porter highlights.
The strategy must be successful in each of its links.
Competitive advantage cannot be concentrated in one or more chains of value creation.
Why?
The fact is that then your decision can be easily copied.
Only if in different elements of the chain of value creation you have a competitive advantage,
only in this case you can copy the best model of the cat.
The strategy must be constant.
The consistency of the strategy is a guarantee of the stability of the company's value proposition.
That is, you cannot constantly go along with the consumers, suppliers, adapt to everything that happens in the environment.
You need to choose only the most important, most significant events for adaptation.
In order not to be in a situation when we pay too much attention to the complaints of consumers.
As a result, this is the most serious threat.
Because we do not process, do not act on one segment of the market.
We start jumping.
Accordingly, the next postulate is to choose your segment.
Segmentation is the most important part of creating a strategy.
You can choose absolutely any segment of the consumer, absolutely any product or motivators for buying goods and services.
Another thing is that you need to clearly outline the frameworks of this selected segment.
And make sure that the boundaries of the selected segment are not blurred.
Otherwise, we have the opportunity to lose the strategic advantages that we have invested in our strategy.
The next important postulate.
The role of the head of the company in the development and implementation of a strategy is reduced to certain functions.
He is not a consumer of the strategy, but not its operator, not its doer.
His activity is to pose questions, to provide answers to these questions at the level of vision formation, at the level of the formation of standards, at the level of the top.
His activity is to choose participants of the group of developers.
At the first stage, it is desirable that he takes part in the development of the strategy.
Maybe even in each business unit.
He must provide the dedication of the board of directors to the main strategic plans of the company.
If necessary, his task is to attract external experts or consultants.
Please note that strategies are not its elements.
A strategy is all the elements in a set.
Goals, vision, restructuring, merging and absorption, that is, the events that need to be held.
All this is not a strategy.
A strategy is when they are together.
A strategy is a unique value proposition that differs from competitors in general, which contains clear compromises and the determination of what the company will not do.
These are actions that are combined with each other and mutually strengthen.
When developing a strategy, we observe typical mistakes.
When a strategy is not implemented as a result, or is implemented somehow poorly.
These are mistakes related to the management component.
According to statistics, only about 10% of companies that have started developing a strategy reach its implementation and successfully implement it.
What are these typical mistakes?
First, it is insufficient support from the management and insufficient level of involvement of staff in the development of a strategy.
Including information about the company's strategy.
In one of the largest oil holdings, working with the middle management, I asked a question.
Who knows the company's mission?
The company's strategy was developed and implemented 10 years ago and is now constantly being corrected.
Accordingly, for 10 years, the company's mission is on the company's website.
This mission is achieved.
In principle, in its content, the mission is not a slogan on the fence and a signature.
This is a well-developed mission.
Only 5% of middle managers were able to formulate the mission of their company.
The next typical mistake is a low priority.
The development of a strategy and its implementation is given priority at the level of ordinary operational management.
In this case, each employee prioritizes the tasks in front of him.
The task of the strategy is one of the last plans.
Naturally, the hands do not reach it.
The second mistake is related to the formation of the working group.
The maximum set of key competencies of the company should be included there.
As a rule, if this does not happen, some important part of the strategy can be lost.
The next mistake is related to the desire of the company to select the maximum number of goals,
the maximum number of indicators and characterizers.
As an example, I can give the general goal of one of the companies.
The company has more than 40 targets.
Each of these 40 targets has about 7-10 indicators.
Let's take 10 for the sake of simplicity.
This means 400 management objects.
All these management objects are interconnected.
Such a system loses its management.
And, in principle, it turned out that a significant number of indicators were used at each level.
A much more limited number.
The next typical mistake is the establishment of unattainable goals.
The unattainability of the goal stimulates the behavior of employees of different hierarchies.
They should lower their hands, because these goals cannot be achieved anyway.
Why make an effort to an unattainable goal?
Therefore, the strategy is not implemented.
The next typical mistake is the compatibility with existing control systems.
The implementation of the strategy must be monitored.
It is necessary to carry out a plan-fact analysis of the performance of indicators
and the achievement of the target values of these indicators for each allocated and decomposed strategic goal.
Accordingly, some reaper points should be designated, according to which the control is carried out.
If at the moment the company does not have control systems that are ready to remove the values of the indicators,
it is impossible to correct the strategy and it can become an inadequate situation.
And, accordingly, the inadequacy of the real situation, both inside the company and in its external environment,
that is, the strategy that the company implements, can lead to the most deplorable results for the company.
The competence of the employees should be trained and prepared to start implementing the strategy.
The detailing of the strategic map can be insufficient or, on the contrary, excessive.
Communication.
The lack of interaction with employees leads to the fact that we do not correctly build a horizontal integration of the goals between the units
and a vertical decomposition of the goals within the organizational structure of the company,
which, in fact, leads to the movement in the wrong direction, which was planned when developing the strategy.
And finally, the last and most important typical mistake is to bring the situation to a significant resistance to changes.
In a separate module dedicated to the management of organizational changes, you will consider this problem.
I can tell you that if during the implementation of any organizational changes, including the development and implementation of the strategy,
we do not observe any positive moments in three months, we can bury all our beginnings, because then the resistance to changes will increase.
Moreover, I will remind you of the classic saying, a kind word and a cat is pleased.
Any such strategic-scale events should be encouraged by the management.
Now you can complete the task presented in your workbook.
Let's consider an example of the development of a strategy by a group of companies.
The company is Russian, it is engaged in metallurgy.
For this company, a project was carried out on the development of a strategy for the establishment of a strategic planning system,
on the development and implementation of a system of balanced indicators.
The project was accompanied by the implementation of the ERP system as information support, and a design office was also created within the framework of the project.
As for the company, the company is the leader in the ferroalloy market in Russia.
The key indicators that the company had at the beginning of the project were the annual turnover of 200 million, the market share of 25%.
What problems preceded the project? Why was the project started?
The company lacked a systematic approach to decision-making, it lacked planning of movement and achievement of strategic goals,
and the company realized the imperfection of the ERP system.
The project was carried out under the framework of strategic diagnostics.
During the strategic diagnostics, a group of stakeholders was identified, strategic goals were set and the company's vision was determined.
Then a strategy was developed, which was reflected in two documents, namely the Strategy Act and the Corporate Culture Code.
Within the framework of the development of a decomposition of the strategy at all levels, at the level of business units and individual units of the company,
master plans of strategic events, strategic maps for each unit were developed, and indicators of achievement of these goals,
indicators of achievement of goals entered into the strategic maps of the unit were established.
At the same time, a motivation system was set up, a bonus calculation system was developed, a regulation of adjusting the balanced indicator system was developed,
and an implementation audit was also carried out.
Thus, the stages of the project were first developed by the corporate strategy, then the development of a balanced indicator system,
then the optimization of business processes and the setting up of a motivation system and a control system,
simultaneously the implementation of the ERP system, namely the automation of the balanced indicator system,
then the audit and the implementation of the motivation system of personnel and the process of organizational changes,
and finally, the implementation of the balanced indicator systems.
The project results.
The strategy of the company has been developed, there is no continuous adjustment and implementation of the strategy,
the work of the balanced indicator system is integrated into the company's management processes,
monitoring and control of the implementation of the target indicators is carried out,
personal maps are used to set up tasks, that is, decomposition is carried out up to the level of the employee.
Operational planning is ensured, pilot master plans are developed,
the implementation of the ERP system for IT support of the balanced indicator system is currently nearing its end.
What is the result for the client of this project?
The growth of business turnover in accordance with the strategy of the group grew by $ 40 million per year
during the first six months of the next year after the project was introduced.
The shareholders are provided with transparency of the processes that flow into the business projects.
Management of new projects is based on the strategy of the entire group of companies as a whole,
and the interests of the top management are associated with the strategy of the group of companies
through the implementation of the motivation system based on the results.
The main result is the growth of the business value.
Now let's see what happened at each stage of the development of the company strategy.
We acted according to the algorithm you already know.
First, the work with the company owners was carried out and the strategic goals of the company were determined.
Then, within the framework of strategic diagnostics,
the analysis and study of the internal environment and the external environment of the company was carried out,
based on which a hypothesis was built on what the vision of the company should be in five years.
The interests of stakeholders, in principle, interested groups, consumers, suppliers, competitors, employees of the state were identified.
As a result, the vision was formed, the target state, which is expected by the company owners in the specified period, in five years.
This target state was translated into the description of the strategy through the decomposition of goals by building a strategic map and the assignment of an indicator for each goal, which measures its achievements and target values.
When the strategic priorities of the business owners were identified, the following priorities were identified.
Increasing the value for shareholders at the expense of maximizing the flows of free money is the final financial goal of the company.
This is motivated by the statements of external studies that showed a correlation between free money flows and the increase in the share price.
Further, the growth of profitability and profitability is an expansion of the existing business, which means an increase in income only after the increase in profitability.
In the area of management of costs, the company was to reduce trade and general administrative costs in order to increase operating profits.
The next goal is capital optimization. The company needed to effectively manage its physical and financial capital so that the growth of income and profits contributed to increasing the value for shareholders.
Finally, the company's growth is due to strategic transactions, that is, the creation of new strategic partners that would facilitate the development of the company's key competencies, product management in this category and the construction of a distribution system.
The next step was to analyze the interested groups.
Suppliers, wholesale and retail suppliers, competitors, large and medium-sized metallurgical enterprises,
logistic service consumers, partners, investment partners, strategic partners and technological partners.
In addition, the regulatory bodies, the interests of shareholders and the interests of company employees were considered.
The following is an example of the results of the analysis.
For example, the interests of external groups of influence were identified.
The analysis is presented in the form of a table, where the identified group of influence is located in the first column.
The next column is the sphere of their interests, the strategy, the goals of the group of companies.
And finally, the possible actions that the company can carry out in response to the actions and goals of external groups of influence.
For example, the authorities, political goals, the preservation of control over the industry, in particular, in the CIS, Kazakhstan, state reserves related to sales and purchases, this characterizes Russia, the implementation and control of the law and regulatory documents, economic parameters, the growth of budgetary revenues at all levels at the expense of taxes,
the support of other industries at the expense of the purposeful reduction of prices, corruption.
The goals of corrupt officials were formed as follows.
The incursion of competition orders, racketeering, the cause of significant, including irreparable damage to business.
What possible actions can a group of companies carry out in response?
Regulatory impact on the industry through federal legislation, fiscal regulation, tariff regulation and lobbying.
Similar tables were filled for all groups of influence.
As a result of the information collection and management examination of the company, a complex analysis was built.
Weak sides, strong sides, possibilities and threats.
As weak sides, as you can see on the slide, were noted the absence of a structured marketing service, the unclear implementation of business processes,
the absence of reliable timely financial information, the absence of clear criteria for building financial indicators, and so on.
Problems associated with poor allocation of responsibility centers during logistic operations, a weak motivation system, and further weak sides were highlighted.
As strong sides, the company highlighted the marketing, the organization of periodic market analysis, the availability of information on the behavior of competitors,
the implementation of advertising in the main media, the provision of service services, including delivery, packaging, and so on.
In the field of finance, the strong sides of the company are financial stability and the transition to new IT solutions,
therefore, the development of a system of control and monitoring of finances.
In the field of personnel, the team work is well-balanced, the readiness for self-development and a high market level of earnings above the average.
As for threats and possibilities, competitors, consumers and suppliers were considered, as well as various economic, social and political problems that may arise.
As an example, I will name the threats and possibilities that have been formulated regarding competitors.
Threats. Black PR, consolidation, dumping, industrial espionage, low self-esteem in the company, the use of gray schemes and sources of procurement,
the withdrawal from customs duties, the presence of a strong administrative resource and the growth of the branch network.
As an opportunity, the creation of strategic alliances based on various options of unions, absorption and expulsion, conglomerates, and so on.
And, accordingly, all other externally interested parties are also described, which form the possibilities of the threat.
Suppliers, buyers, economic and social events in the country and changes in legislation.
As a result, we are addressing the development of a grouping of strategic goals and the formation of strategic alternatives.
We have already talked about this slide, we show it to you again.
The following are the strategic goals of the group of companies.
For each of these goals, a set of strategic alternatives and key indicators are developed, which allow to measure the implementation of a particular strategic alternative, a particular strategic goal.
Further, the strategic goals of the group of companies were broken down into sub-goals.
Please note that in this project the goal tree was not built, it was more convenient for the owners to work with a table,
therefore, the breaking down and decomposition of the group of goals into sub-goals was carried out in this form.
The goal of the company's growth is to increase the company's investment attractiveness, maximize the company's profits in the long term,
increase income, increase the company's assets, expand the sales market, increase the transparency of the business,
increase the internal efficiency of the group of companies, including increasing financial stability, optimizing costs and increasing the efficiency of the main processes.
The second goal is internal reforming of the company.
Here, the growth of the production scale, the creation of a self-organizing and self-developing business, the organization of investment and innovation activities,
the increase of business transparency and the preparation of the company for the IPO, effective attraction and management of finances,
that is, the company's strategy is aimed at creating a financial institute, building a loyal and corporate culture and formation of team leaders.
And finally, the social direction of the business.
Here, effective interaction with the authorities, participation in state social and infrastructure programs, and so on, are allocated under the group of goals.
Then, the strategic goals were divided into directions and, if possible, were concretized.
The directions were chosen as follows.
Corporate structure, what needs to be done in the current business, what needs to be done regarding changes in approaches to business,
and what needs to be done to create new businesses within the group of companies.
In particular, speaking about the corporate structure, the company assumes the development of corporate culture,
changes in selection requirements and, accordingly, the formation of a strong team,
the organization of the project approach and assessment of the effectiveness of the activity through the indicators system, which is focused on achieving results,
the creation of competence within the company in assessing independent investment projects.
In the field of the current business, the company expands its geographical presence in Russia, the CIS countries, Europe and China,
expands its product line, holds vertical integration events with the creation of a vertically integrated holding,
and creates a supermarket, that is, creates a kind of buffet for the consumer, so that he can choose various goods and services,
which are able to hold the group of companies as a whole.
Approaches to business, how should they change.
First, a co-op approach should be introduced, aimed at increasing the value of the business,
optimizing the costs, diversifying and differentiating the business.
An investment approach, a project approach should be introduced, and the company turns to creating strategic partnerships,
which can be achieved by absorbing companies on the one hand, and on the other hand, by creating strategic alliances.
Moreover, the company is aimed at an innovative breakthrough.
Due to this, the goals associated with the development of the mechanism of creating new businesses and their methodology were set out in the field of creating new businesses.
That is, the development of methods of attraction, management mechanisms, hedging risks, determination of centers of responsibility
and criteria for assessing internal and external projects that the company is going to implement in the framework of creating a new business.
As a result, the vision of the company was formed.
In 5 years, the group of companies will represent a large interregional ferroalloy sphere,
specializing in the trade of ferroalloys and colored metals with turnover exceeding 1 billion euros.
As part of this vision, the main additional strategy was developed.
The main strategy is to achieve synergy due to product and geographical expansion within the existing business.
The additional strategy is diversification, geographical and product expansion due to the creation of new businesses and the creation of an innovative investment mechanism.
To achieve this strategy, measures were carried out to develop strategic initiatives, strategic measures.
The ANSOF matrix and the matrix of the Boston consulting group were used for this.
As a result, those directions were highlighted in the development of the product line,
which are of strategic interest for this group of companies.
These are solid alloys, ferroalloys, alcoaten, powder wire, leasing, equipment for metallurgical and machine-building enterprises.
In the field of logistics, these are ships for logistics operations.
In the field of production, ferroalloys are being expanded.
In the field of strategic partnerships, these are the acquisition of HOKs, which are engaged in the production of margins.
Finally, the metals that the company is going to deal with are already marked on the products.
Color metals, ore chromium, margans, concentrates, zinc, titanium oxide.
For each of these products, a market segment is marked on which it will be sold.
Thus, you have seen some examples of strategic development.
At the stage when the company did not have a formalized strategy,
there was an idea of what the company should be like only in the eyes of the owners.
The representatives of the company, the top management company,
who were supposed to be responsible for the implementation of the strategy, were not familiar with this idea.
At the first stage of formalization, the strategy was built,
the strategy was consciously developed by the owners of the company and the top management of the company.
In what direction should we move, what events should be carried out.
This event, this strategy was not put on the shelf, it is being implemented,
it is being monitored and corrected annually in accordance with the implemented regulations of the development of a balanced indicator system.
Thank you for your attention.